---
layout: post
title: Update on Bio-Formats Development Work
tags: file-formats data-model future-plans
categories: blog
---

Current development on Bio-Formats can be grouped into four tags:

### Model changes

Through our 4.4.x and 5.0.x releases (July 2012-present), we’ve held the OME
Data Model and all interfaces largely constant, primarily to support the large
and growing array of users of our software, and to avoid destabilizing any of
the tools they use. Stability is great for our user community, but now we’ve
reached a point where several extensions of OME software demand updates to the
core OME Data Model.
 
In our upcoming 5.1.x releases, we are instituting a series of model changes
that substantially expand OME’s capabilities. Some of these simply reflect
corrections or additions that are necessary to keep the software fresh and
up-to-date. Others are additions that we intend to be the foundation for work
in the next 1-2 years.

Examples include:

*  A new metadata feature that allows users to use
   annotations which take the form of key-value pairs (e.g. ‘cell line’ and
   ‘HT-293’). This provides a flexible, semi-structured way for users to add
   critical components of metadata (e.g. experimental protocol metadata)
   stored in OME-TIFF or OMERO or read by Bio-Formats.

*  Changing channel wavelength from 'int' to 'float' - this is a long overdue
   fix which recognizes the increasing use of illumination systems with
   special wavelengths that must be represented with better than integer
   accuracy.

*  Unit support - this is by far the most substantial change in the 5.1.x
   series. We want as many of the metadata values as possible to be described
   by correct scientific units. For example, the wavelength of a laser source
   should be “647.0 nm”. This capability becomes particularly important as OME
   expands the data types it supports from electron
   microscopy through light microscopy and mesoscopic imaging. One example of
   the importance of the units is that recording the pixel size of the images
   in these different domains is critical for proper measurements and
   analysis. In the longer term, we aim to record and express the relationship
   between different images, e.g. in correlative imaging, so we must have this
   capability.

### C++ implementation

For OME 5.1 we are releasing a native C++ implementation for Bio-Formats. The
goal here is to make it easier to call Bio-Formats from a non-Java program.
The first version of this work will be released with 5.1.0 but the API will
be subject to change until the 5.2 release later in 2015. Our goal is again
to expand the number of domains in which OME software can be used, in
particular into applications such as ITK, OpenCV, and NumPy in medical
imaging.

For the moment, our work here is related to basic I/O functionality
(reading/writing OME-TIFF etc.). This proves the concept and allows us to look
forward to adding specific readers that will benefit the community. 

*Disclaimer: not all, or even most, of the Java-based Bio-Formats will be
ported to C++.*

### Format fixes

As always we have been working on fixing several formats. This work has been
complicated by the number of imaging modalities which are appearing inside in
each individual file format (see [previous blog post](http://blog.openmicroscopy.org/file-formats/2014/10/16/file-formats/)).
Our work is focused on ND2, MetaMorph, Prairie, DICOM, Zeiss CZI, and Leica
LIF. We also have added support for the i2i and im3 formats.

### Performance

Dataset sizes continue to increase by several-fold, so Bio-Formats’
capabilities have to keep up. For the 5.1 release, we’ve reduced the
overhead for metadata parsing, improved I/O buffering, and tuned Zeiss CZI and
several HCS readers to have faster initialization and plane reading times.

## Looking a bit further forward...

After the 5.1 release, we of course have several more things we are
considering. To get changes to Bio-Formats out to the community as rapidly as
possible, we will begin the process of decoupling Bio-Formats releases from
the rest of the OME project’s work. We have released all the different tools
together because, in fact, they are closely related, and a release process
requires a lot of the same testing and process (release-testing
production-grade software is not easy, as any developer will tell you). In
short, it’s easier for the OME team to work this way, but clearly it is better
for Bio-Formats users if we get updates and fixes out as soon as possible.  Of
course, we want to accelerate Bio-Formats releases, while maintaining all the
testing and QA which helps make the software so useful. This means work on our
[CI system](http://ci.openmicroscopy.org) to make all this happen. Stay tuned.
