---
layout: post
title: OME Files C++ and C++11
tags: file-formats ome-files
categories: blog
---

This blog is an update about the use of
[C++11](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C%2B%2B11) and
[C++14](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C%2B%2B14) ("modern C++") within
OME Files C++.

We have been evaluating the switch from C++98 to C++11 for over 18
months.  Up until now, we have remained using C++98 in order to
continue to support older systems with compilers which do not support
C++11.  However, circumstances have recently changed which will
necessitate a switch at some point in the near future.

## Platform support

Most current platforms support C++11 and C++14, with some exceptions
(workarounds are noted)

| Platform           | Compiler       | C++11                   | C++14                   |
| ------------------ | -------------- | ----------------------- | ----------------------- |
| CentOS 6           | GCC 4.6        | Unsupported by default* | Unsupported by default* |
| CentOS 7           | GCC 4.8        | Mostly supported        | Partially supported     |
| FreeBSD 10         | Clang/LLVM 3.4 | Fully supported         | Fully supported         |
| FreeBSD 11         | Clang/LLVM 3.8 | Fully supported         | Fully supported         |
| MacOS X 10.10      | Apple LLVM 7.3 | Fully supported         | Fully supported         |
| MacOS X 10.11      | Apple LLVM 8.0 | Fully supported         | Fully supported         |
| MacOS X 10.12      | Apple LLVM 8.0 | Fully supported         | Fully supported         |
| Ubuntu 14.04       | GCC 4.8        | Mostly supported        | Partially supported     |
| Ubuntu 16.04       | GCC 5.3        | Fully supported         | Fully supported†        |
| Visual Studio 2013 | VC12‡          | Partially supported     | Mostly unsupported      |
| Visual Studio 2015 | VC13‡          | Supported               | Partially supported     |
| Visual Studio 2017 | VC15‡          | Supported               | Supported               |

\* The software collections
  [devtoolset-4](https://www.softwarecollections.org/en/scls/rhscl/devtoolset-4/)
  (GCC 5.2) and
  [devtoolset-3](https://www.softwarecollections.org/en/scls/rhscl/devtoolset-3/)
  (GCC 4.9) packages provide updated compilers which can build OME
  Files C++ using C++11

† Boost 1.58 provided by this release does not build OME Files with
  C++14, but does build with C++11; see [trac
  ticket](https://svn.boost.org/trac/boost/ticket/11285)

‡ Microsoft Visual C++ lags significantly behind GCC and Clang/LLVM,
  but VS2013 contains a useful subset of features, which are improved
  upon significantly with VS2015 and later

The support classifications above are broad; please see the following
references for full feature coverage:

- [Overview](http://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/compiler_support)
- [GCC support](https://gcc.gnu.org/projects/cxx-status.html#cxx11)
- [Clang support](http://clang.llvm.org/cxx_status.html)
- [Visual Studio support](https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/hh567368.aspx)

## Third-party dependencies

All of our third-party dependencies have *supported* building with a
C++11 or C++14 compiler for some time.  However, more recently some of
our dependencies have begun to *require* it, or will require it in
their next major release.

- Qt 5.7 (released June 2016) [requires
  C++11](http://blog.qt.io/blog/2016/06/16/qt-5-7-released/)
- ICU 59 (expected April 2017) is [expected to require
  C++11](https://sourceforge.net/p/icu/mailman/message/35232691/)
  (delayed from ICU 58 to 59)

For many users, these libraries are provided by package repositories,
including Linux distributions' package managers, MacOS X homebrew and
FreeBSD ports.  As these package repositories begin to provide the
updated C++11 versions of these libraries, OME Files C++ will no
longer build with them.  While some of these C++11 libraries are
optional (Qt5), others such as ICU are required by Boost and
Xerces-C++ for full Unicode support, which is needed by the OME-XML
data model.  As a result, C++11 support will become a necessity for
continued use of these libraries as the versions requiring C++11 enter
mainstream use.

## The benefits of C++11

C++11 adds a number of useful features to the language, including:

- `auto` type
- `decltype` keyword
- `default`ed and `delete`d functions
- delegating constructors
- forward-declared `enum`s
- initialiser lists
- lambdas
- `nullptr` keyword
- `override` and `final` qualifiers
- range-based `for` loops
- rvalue references
- `static_assert`
- strongly-typed `enum`s
- variadic templates

and library features, including:

- `std::array`
- `std::shared_ptr`
- `std::thread`
- `std::tuple`
- `std::unique_ptr`

These features are all supported by the compilers on the above
platforms.  Some additional features (not included here) are not yet
supported by the compilers on every platform, and so can't yet be
used.

These features benefit the project in several ways:

- they reduce the code size dramatically by permitting much more
  concise code with reduced boilerplate (by around 50% in one test
  conversion of a single component)
- they allow the use of standard library features in place of Boost
  equivalents, which aids interoperability (e.g. `std::thread` and
  `std::shared_ptr` in place of `boost::thread` and
  `boost::shared_ptr`)
- they allow improved performance of standard library containers
  through the use of rvalue references, and also allow the use of new
  features such as `std::unique_ptr` to replace `boost::shared_ptr` in
  certain situations, again improving performance
- they make the library easier to use, for example the use of
  initialiser lists can reduce the `PixelBuffer` nD array addressing
  from multiple lines to a single line of code
- they make the library more understandable and more familiar for
  users already using these features with other libraries; in
  particular features such as `std::shared_ptr` have been available
  since VS2010 for Windows developers and their use is already
  widespread

## Proposal

Given that:

- all of our supported platforms can support a sizeable subset of
  C++11
- our dependencies will increasingly require C++11
- there are significant benefits to switching to C++11 as a result of
  the features and performance gains it brings

we plan to make a C++11 compiler a requirement in our upcoming 0.3.0
release of OME Files C++, and begin using a subset of the C++11
features available across our supported platforms.  For most users,
the transition should be entirely transparent and will require no
immediate code changes as we will leave compatibility typedefs in
place through a transitional period.

If this will present any problems, please get in touch through our
[mailing
lists](http://www.openmicroscopy.org/site/community/mailing-lists) or
[forums](http://www.openmicroscopy.org/community/) so that we can
discuss any concerns you may have.  Likewise, if the change is
something which you will find useful and beneficial, we would also
like to hear from you.
