---
layout: post
title: OME Transition
intro-blurb: Migration to an interim leadership team
---

Over the past two decades, OME has grown into a vibrant and global community
dedicated to developing open standards, tools, and resources for the
management, sharing, and analysis of microscopy image data. It has been a
privilege and a joy to work alongside so many of you to build OME into the
trusted and widely recognized initiative it is today.

As many of you know, I have joined CZI to contribute to their work on
bioimaging data, so I will no longer be leading OME. For the avoidance of
doubt, and because several people have asked: I am not “taking” OME to CZI– no
such thing is possible as OME does not “belong” to anyone. I very much hope
that CZI teams and resources can make important and useful contributions to
OME, just as they do for many other community efforts and projects, but that is
for the future.  

I want to reassure everyone that the future of OME is secure and that its
mission remains unchanged. To ensure continuity, I have asked Jean-Marie Burel
(University of Dundee), Josh Moore (German BioImaging), Stefanie
Weidtkamp-Peters (HHU), Matthew Hartley (EMBL-EBI), and Virginie Uhlmann
(University of Zurich) to form an interim leadership team. Together, they will
ensure the immediate continuity of OME’s offerings– web site, software, CI, and
meetings– and keep the community updated on plans and progress. 

You might ask: “Why these people and not others?  Why this number and not more
(or less)?”.  Good question.  Here’s the thinking:

OME should grow and expand but how?  An obvious way forward is to engage an
interim team comprised of members of the community who have contributed to OME
in various ways, start building ideas and knowledge and then run a full
community process to chart a path forward.  This group will therefore form an
interim leadership group and, with the community’s input, guide OME to its next
phase.  

The interim leadership is not a final or exclusive structure, but a group of
people and their teams and/or institutions that have expertise in file formats,
software tools and data resources. They also have access to resources– funding
and teams-  to ensure that OME remains successful and productive while we plan
for its future. The [next OME meeting](https://gerbi-gmb.de/event/ome-2026-community-meeting/),
in April 2026, will
provide an opportunity for the team to seek feedback from the broader community
on OME’s long term mission, structure, and governance arrangements. A major
goal for 2026 will be to define strategic and governance plans for OME’s
future.  

OME has always thrived thanks to the commitment and creativity of its
community. I am confident that, with your continued support, OME will not only
maintain its strong foundations but will also grow in new and exciting
directions. The work ahead is full of promise, and I look forward to watching
OME’s future successes from a different perspective.

Jason Swedlow

*This post is available on [image.sc](https://forum.image.sc/t/ome-transition-update/117191) for comments.*
