---
layout: post
title: Release of OMERO.server 5.6.16
intro-blurb: The OME team is pleased to announce the release of OMERO.server 5.6.16
---

The main focus of this release is the update of the dependencies of OMERO.server.
This includes the removal of unnused dependencies as well as the upgrade of several
libraries where the current version is associated with public vulnerabilities. It
also includes a server fix when reading `omero.policy.binary_access` stored as a group
configuration. The version of Bio-Formats bundled with the OMERO.server binary is
bumped to 8.2.0 and will invalidate previous Bio-Formats Memoizer cache files.
Please refer to the upgrade guide for further information. Finally this release
adds NumPy 2.3 support via OMERO.scripts 5.9.1 shipped with the server binary,
OMERO.py 5.21.0 and OMERO.web 5.29.1.

The following OMERO.server dependencies have been upgraded:

- `org.openmicroscopy:omero-blitz` from 5.8.2 to 5.8.3
- `org.openmicroscopy:omero-common` from 5.7.2 to 5.7.3
- `org.openmicroscopy:omero-gateway-java` from 5.10.2 to 5.10.3
- `org.openmicroscopy:omero-model` from 5.7.2 to 5.7.3
- `org.openmicroscopy:omero-server` from 5.7.2 to 5.7.3
- `org.openmicroscopy:omero-renderer` from 5.6.2 to 5.6.3
- `org.openmicroscopy:omero-romio` from 5.8.2 to 5.8.3
- Spring Framework from 4.3.14 to 4.3.30
- Spring Security LDAP from 4.2.4 to 4.2.20
- `net.sf.ehcache:ehcache` from 2.10.4 to 2.10.9.2
- `org.quartz-scheduler:quartz` from 2.2.1 to 2.4.0
- `org.apache.calcite:calcite-core` from 1.20.0 to 1.35.0
- `org.apache.xmlgraphics:batik-codec` from 1.9.1 to 1.19

The following OMERO.server dependencies have been removed:

- `org.apache.xmlgraphics:batik-all` in favor of org.apache.xmlgraphics:batik-codec and its dependencies
- `com.jamonapi:jamon`
- `edu.ucar:bufr`
- `edu.ucar:udunits`


- Replace usage of Java Util Logging (JUL) by SLF4J
- Upgrade of Bio-Formats to version 8.1.1.

### Installing the Software:

For full details of the changes included in the OMERO 5.6 series see the
[OMERO 5.6.0]({{ site.baseurl }}/2020/01/15/omero-5-6-0.html) release
announcement.

This release has been tested with
[OMERO.py 5.21.0](https://pypi.org/project/omero-py/5.21.0/) and
[OMERO.web 5.29.1](https://pypi.org/project/omero-web/5.29.1/). We
recommend that you upgrade OMERO.py and OMERO.web accordingly on your deployments.

Official Docker images are available as usual on Docker Hub with either
the latest or the 5.6 tag. Both Docker images have been upgraded to Rocky Linux 9:

* <https://hub.docker.com/r/openmicroscopy/omero-server>
* <https://hub.docker.com/r/openmicroscopy/omero-web-standalone>


You are invited to discuss this announcement on
[the image.sc forum](https://forum.image.sc/tags/c/data-management/omero).

All the best with your upgrades,

The OME Team

